table of contents
ix
Table of Contents (Summary)
Table of Contents (the real thing)
Your brain on Python.  Here you are trying to learn something, while 
here your brain is doing you a favor by making sure the learning doesn’t stick. 
Your brain’s thinking, “Better leave room for more important things, like which 
wild animals to avoid and whether naked snowboarding is a bad idea.” So how 
do you trick your brain into thinking that your life depends on knowing Python? 
Intro
Who is this book for? 
xxiv
We know what you’re thinking 
xxv
Metacognition 
xxvii
Bend your brain into submission 
xxix
Read me 
xxx
The technical review team 
xxxii
Acknowledgments 
xxxiii
  
Intro 
xxiii
1 
Meet Python: Everyone Loves Lists 
1
2 
Sharing Your Code: Modules of  Functions 
33
3 
Files and Exceptions: Dealing with Errors 
73
4 
Persistence: Saving Data to Files 
105
5 
Comprehending Data: Work That Data! 
139
6 
Custom Data Objects: Bundling Code with Data 
173
7 
Web Development: Putting It All Together 
213
8 
Mobile App Development: Small Devices 
255
9 
Manage Your Data: Handling Input 
293
10 
Scaling Your Webapp: Getting Real 
351
11 
Dealing with Complexity: Data Wrangling 
397
i 
Leftovers: The Top Ten Things (We Didn’t Cover) 
435
table of contents
x
What’s to like about Python? 
2
Install Python 3 
3
Use IDLE to help learn Python 
4
Work effectively with IDLE 
5
Deal with complex data 
6
Create simple Python lists 
7
Lists are like arrays 
9
Add more data to your list 
11
Work with your list data 
15
For loops work with lists of any size 
16
Store lists within lists 
18
Check a list for a list 
20
Complex data is hard to process 
23
Handle many levels of nested lists 
24
Don’t repeat code; create a function 
28
Create a function in Python 
29
Recursion to the rescue! 
31
Your Python Toolbox 
32
Everyone loves lists
1
meet python
You’re asking one question: “What makes Python different?”
The short answer is: lots of things. The longer answers starts by stating that there’s 
lots that’s familiar, too. Python is a lot like any other general-purpose programming 
language, with statements, expressions, operators, functions, modules, methods, 
and classes. All the usual stuff, really. And then there’s the other stuff Python provides 
that makes the programmer’s life—your life—that little bit easier. You’ll start your tour 
of Python by learning about lists. But, before getting to that, there’s another important 
question that needs answering…
The Holy Grail, 1975, Terry Jones & Terry Gilliam, 91 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
table of contents
xi
Modules of functions
Reusable code is great, but a shareable module is better. 
By sharing your code as a Python module, you open up your code to the entire Python 
community…and it’s always good to share, isn’t it? In this chapter, you’ll learn how to 
create, install, and distribute your own shareable modules. You’ll then load your module 
onto Python’s software sharing site on the Web, so that everyone can benefit from your 
work. Along the way, you’ll pick up a few new tricks relating to Python’s functions, too.
sharing your code
2
It’s too good not to share 
34
Turn your function into a module 
35
Modules are everywhere 
36
Comment your code 
37
Prepare your distribution 
40
Build your distribution 
41
A quick review of your distribution 
42
Import a module to use it 
43
Python’s modules implement namespaces 
45
Register with the PyPI website 
47
Upload your code to PyPI 
48
Welcome to the PyPI community 
49
Control behavior with an extra argument 
52
Before your write new code, think BIF 
53
Python tries its best to run your code 
57
Trace your code 
58
Work out what’s wrong 
59
Update PyPI with your new code 
60
You’ve changed your API 
62
Use optional arguments 
63
Your module supports both APIs 
65
Your API is still not right 
66
Your module’s reputation is restored 
70
Your Python Toolbox 
71
nester
nester.py
setup.py
table of contents
xii
Data is external to your program 
74
It’s all lines of text 
75
Take a closer look at the data 
77
Know your data 
79
Know your methods and ask for help 
80
Know your data (better) 
82
Two very different approaches 
83
Add extra logic 
84
Handle exceptions 
88
Try first, then recover 
89
Identify the code to protect 
91
Take a pass on the error 
93
What about other errors? 
96
Add more error-checking code… 
97
…Or add another level of exception handling 
98
So, which approach is best? 
99
You’re done…except for one small thing 
101
Be specific with your exceptions 
102
Your Python Toolbox 
103
Dealing with errors
3
files and exceptions
It’s simply not enough to process your list data in your code.
You need to be able to get your data into your programs with ease, too. It’s no surprise 
then that Python makes reading data from files easy. Which is great, until you 
consider what can go wrong when interacting with data external to your programs…
and there are lots of things waiting to trip you up! When bad stuff happens, you need a 
strategy for getting out of trouble, and one such strategy is to deal with any exceptional 
situations using Python’s exception handling mechanism showcased in this chapter.
split(beans)
table of contents
xiii
Saving data to files
It is truly great to be able to process your file-based data.
But what happens to your data when you’re done? Of course, it’s best to save your 
data to a disk file, which allows you to use it again at some later date and time. Taking 
your memory-based data and storing it to disk is what persistence is all about. Python 
supports all the usual tools for writing to files and also provides some cool facilities for 
efficiently storing Python data. 
persistence
4
Programs produce data 
106
Open your file in write mode 
110
Files are left open after an exception! 
114
Extend try with finally 
115
Knowing the type of error is not enough 
117
Use with to work with files 
120
Default formats are unsuitable for files 
124
Why not modify print_lol()? 
126
Pickle your data 
132
Save with dump and restore with load 
133
Generic file I/O with pickle is the way to go! 
137
Your Python Toolbox 
138
['Is this the right room for an 
argument?', "No you haven't!", 
'When?', "No you didn't!", "You 
didn't!", 'You did not!', 'Ah! 
(taking out his wallet and paying) 
Just the five minutes.', 'You most 
certainly did not!', "Oh no you 
didn't!", "Oh no you didn't!", "Oh 
look, this isn't an argument!", 
"No it isn't!", "It's just 
contradiction!", 'It IS!', 'You 
just contradicted me!', 'You DID!', 
'You did just then!', '(exasperated) 
Oh, this is futile!!', 'Yes it 
is!']
[‘Is this the right room 
for an argument?’, “No 
you haven’t!”, ‘When?’, 
“No you didn’t!”, “You 
didn’t!”, ‘You did not!’, 
‘Ah! (taking out his wallet 
and paying) Just the five 
minutes.’, ‘You most 
certainly did not!’, “Oh 
no you didn’t!”, “Oh no 
you didn’t!”, “Oh look, 
this isn’t an argument!”, 
“No it isn’t!”, “It’s 
just contradiction!”, 
‘It IS!’, ‘You just 
contradicted me!’, ‘You 
DID!’, ‘You did just 
then!’, ‘(exasperated) 
Oh, this is futile!!’, 
‘Yes it is!’]
table of contents
xiv
Coach Kelly needs your help 
140
Sort in one of two ways 
144
The trouble with time 
148
Comprehending lists 
155
Iterate to remove duplicates 
161
Remove duplicates with sets 
166
Your Python Toolbox 
172
Work that data!
5
comprehending data
Data comes in all shapes and sizes, formats and encodings.
To work effectively with your data, you often have to manipulate and transform it into a 
common format to allow for efficient processing, sorting, and storage. In this chapter, 
you’ll explore Python goodies that help you work your data up into a sweat, allowing 
you to achieve data-munging greatness. 
This chapter’s 
guaranteed to give you 
a workout!
table of contents
xv
Bundling code with data
It’s important to match your data structure choice to your data. 
And that choice can make a big difference to the complexity of your code. In Python, 
although really useful, lists and sets aren’t the only game in town. The Python dictionary 
lets you organize your data for speedy lookup by associating your data with names, not 
numbers. And when Python’s built-in data structures don’t quite cut it, the Python class 
statement lets you define your own. This chapter shows you how.
custom data objects
6
Coach Kelly is back (with a new file format) 
174
Use a dictionary to associate data 
178
Bundle your code and its data in a class 
189
Define a class 
190
Use class to define classes 
191
The importance of self 
192
Every method’s first argument is self 
193
Inherit from Python’s built-in list 
204
Coach Kelly is impressed 
211
Your Python Toolbox 
212
The Object 
Factory
table of contents
xvi
7
It’s good to share 
214
You can put your program on the Web 
215
What does your webapp need to do? 
218
Design your webapp with MVC 
221
Model your data 
222
View your interface 
226
Control your code 
234
CGI lets your web server run programs 
235
Display the list of athletes 
236
The dreaded 404 error! 
242
Create another CGI script 
244
Enable CGI tracking to help with errors 
248
A small change can make all the difference 
250
Your webapp’s a hit! 
252
Your Python Toolbox 
253
Putting it all together
web development
Sooner or later, you’ll want to share your app with lots of people. 
You have many options for doing this. Pop your code on PyPI, send out lots of emails, put 
your code on a CD or USB, or simply install your app manually on the computers of those 
people who need it. Sounds like a lot of work…not to mention boring. Also, what happens 
when you produce the next best version of your code? What happens then? How do 
you manage the update? Let’s face it: it’s such a pain that you’ll think up really creative 
excuses not to. Luckily, you don’t have to do any of this: just create a webapp instead. And, 
as this chapter demonstrates, using Python for web development is a breeze.
table of contents
xvii
8
Small devices
Putting your data on the Web opens up all types of possibilities. 
Not only can anyone from anywhere interact with your webapp, but they are increasingly 
doing so from a collection of diverse computing devices: PCs, laptops, tablets, palmtops, 
and even mobile phones. And it’s not just humans interacting with your webapp that 
you have to support and worry about: bots are small programs that can automate web 
interactions and typically want your data, not your human-friendly HTML. In this chapter, 
you exploit Python on Coach Kelly’s mobile phone to write an app that interacts with your 
webapp’s data.
mobile app development
The world is getting smaller 
256
Coach Kelly is on Android 
257
Don’t worry about Python 2 
259
Set up your development environment 
260
Configure the SDK and emulator 
261
Install and configure Android Scripting 
262
Add Python to your SL4A installation 
263
Test Python on Android 
264
Define your app’s requirements 
266
The SL4A Android API 
274
Select from a list on Android 
278
The athlete’s data CGI script 
281
The data appears to have changed type 
284
JSON can’t handle your custom datatypes 
285
Run your app on a real phone 
288
Configure AndFTP 
289
The coach is thrilled with his app 
290
Your Python Toolbox 
291
table of contents
xviii
Your athlete times app has gone national 
294
Use a form or dialog to accept input 
295
Create an HTML form template 
296
The data is delivered to your CGI script 
300
Ask for input on your Android phone 
304
It’s time to update your server data 
308
Avoid race conditions 
309
You need a better data storage mechanism 
310
Use a database management system 
312
Python includes SQLite 
313
Exploit Python’s database API 
314
The database API as Python code 
315
A little database design goes a long way 
316
Define your database schema 
317
What does the data look like? 
318
Transfer the data from your pickle to SQLite 
321
What ID is assigned to which athlete? 
322
Insert your timing data 
323
SQLite data management tools 
326
Integrate SQLite with your existing webapp 
327
You still need the list of names 
332
Get an athlete’s details based on ID 
333
You need to amend your Android app, too 
342
Update your SQLite-based athlete data 
348
The NUAC is over the moon! 
349
Your Python Toolbox 
350
Handling input
9
manage your data
The Web and your phone are not just great ways to display data. 
They are also great tools to for accepting input from your users. Of course, once your 
webapp accepts data, it needs to put it somewhere, and the choices you make when 
deciding what and where this “somewhere” is are often the difference between a webapp 
that’s easy to grow and extend and one that isn’t. In this chapter, you’ll extend your 
webapp to accept data from the Web (via a browser or from an Android phone), as well 
as look at and enhance your back-end data-management services.
table of contents
xix
Getting real
The Web is a great place to host your app…until things get real. 
Sooner or later, you’ll hit the jackpot and your webapp will be wildly successful. When 
that happens, your webapp goes from a handful of hits a day to thousands, possibly ten 
of thousands, or even more. Will you be ready? Will your web server handle the load? 
How will you know? What will it cost? Who will pay? Can your data model scale to 
millions upon millions of data items without slowing to a crawl? Getting a webapp up and 
running is easy with Python and now, thanks to Google App Engine, scaling a Python 
webapp is achievable, too. 
scaling your webapp
10
There are whale sightings everywhere 
352
The HFWWG needs to automate 
353
Build your webapp with Google App Engine 
354
Download and install App Engine 
355
Make sure App Engine is working 
356
App Engine uses the MVC pattern 
359
Model your data with App Engine 
360
What good is a model without a view? 
363
Use templates in App Engine 
364
Django’s form validation framework 
368
Check your form 
369
Controlling your App Engine webapp 
370
Restrict input by providing options 
376
Meet the “blank screen of death” 
378
Process the POST within your webapp 
379
Put your data in the datastore 
380
Don’t break the “robustness principle” 
384
Accept almost any date and time 
385
It looks like you’re not quite done yet 
388
Sometimes, the tiniest change can make all the difference… 
389
Capture your user’s Google ID, too 
390
Deploy your webapp to Google’s cloud 
391
Your HFWWG webapp is deployed! 
394
Your Python Toolbox 
395
table of contents
xx
What’s a good time goal for the next race? 
398
So…what’s the problem? 
400
Start with the data 
401
Store each time as a dictionary 
407
Dissect the prediction code 
409
Get input from your user  
413
Getting input raises an issue… 
414
Search for the closest match 
416
The trouble is with time 
418
The time-to-seconds-to-time module 
419
The trouble is still with time… 
422
Port to Android 
424
Your Android app is a bunch of dialogs 
425
Put your app together… 
429
Your app’s a wrap! 
431
Your Python Toolbox 
432
Data wrangling
11
dealing with complexity
It’s great when you can apply Python to a specific domain area. 
Whether it’s web development, database management, or mobile apps, Python helps 
you get the job done by not getting in the way of you coding your solution. And then 
there’s the other types of problems: the ones you can’t categorize or attach to a domain. 
Problems that are in themselves so unique you have to look at them in a different, highly 
specific way. Creating bespoke software solutions to these type of problems is an area 
where Python excels. In this, your final chapter, you’ll stretch your Python skills to the 
limit and solve problems along the way. 
table of contents
xxi
The Top Ten Things (we didn’t cover)
You’ve come a long way.
But learning about Python is an activity that never stops. The more Python you code, 
the more you’ll need to learn new ways to do certain things. You’ll need to master new 
tools and new techniques, too. There’s just not enough room in this book to show you 
everything you might possibly need to know about Python. So, here’s our list of the top 
ten things we didn’t cover that you might want to learn more about next.
leftovers
i
#1: Using a “professional” IDE 
436
#2: Coping with scoping 
437
#3: Testing 
438
#4: Advanced language features 
439
#5: Regular expressions 
440
#6: More on web frameworks 
441
#7: Object relational mappers and NoSQL 
442
#8: Programming GUIs 
443
#9: Stuff to avoid 
444
#10: Other books 
445
xxiii
how to use this book
Intro
In this section, we answer the burning question:  
“So why DID they put that in a Python book?”
I can’t believe 
they put that in a 
Python book.
xxiv  intro
how to use this book
Who is this book for?
Who should probably back away from this book?
If you can answer “yes” to all of these:
If you can answer “yes” to any of these:
this book is for you.
this book is not for you.
[Note from marketing: this book 
is for anyone with a credit card… 
we’ll accept a check, too.]
Do you prefer actually doing things and applying the stuff 
you learn over listening to someone in a lecture rattle on 
for hours on end?
3
Do you wish you had the know-how to program Python, 
add it to your list of tools, and make it do new things?
2
Are you looking for a reference book to Python, one that 
covers all the details in excruciating detail?
2
Do you already know how to program in another 
programming language?
1
Do you already know most of what you need to know to 
program with Python?
1
Would you rather have your toenails pulled out by 15 
screaming monkeys than learn something new? Do you 
believe a Python book should cover everything and if it 
bores the reader to tears in the process then so much the 
better?
3
you are here 4  xxv
the intro
“How can this be a serious Python book?”
“What’s with all the graphics?”
“Can I actually learn it this way?”
Your brain craves novelty. It’s always searching, scanning, waiting for something 
unusual. It was built that way, and it helps you stay alive. 
So what does your brain do with all the routine, ordinary, normal things 
you encounter? Everything it can to stop them from interfering with the 
brain’s real job—recording things that matter. It doesn’t bother saving the 
boring things; they never make it past the “this is obviously not important” 
filter.
How does your brain know what’s important? Suppose you’re out for a day 
hike and a tiger jumps in front of you, what happens inside your head and 
body? 
Neurons fire. Emotions crank up. Chemicals surge. 
And that’s how your brain knows…
This must be important! Don’t forget it!
But imagine you’re at home, or in a library. It’s a safe, warm, tiger-free zone. 
You’re studying. Getting ready for an exam. Or trying to learn some tough 
technical topic your boss thinks will take a week, ten days at the most.
Just one problem. Your brain’s trying to do you a big favor. It’s trying to 
make sure that this obviously non-important content doesn’t clutter up scarce 
resources. Resources that are better spent storing the really big things. 
Like tigers. Like the danger of fire. Like how you should never have 
posted those “party” photos on your Facebook page. And there’s no 
simple way to tell your brain, “Hey brain, thank you very much, but 
no matter how dull this book is, and how little I’m registering on the 
emotional Richter scale right now, I really do want you to keep this 
stuff around.”
We know what you’re thinking
We know what your brain is thinking
Your brain thinks 
THIS is important.
Your brain thinks 
THIS isn’t worth 
saving.
Great. Only 450 
more dull, dry, 
boring pages.
xxvi  intro
how to use this book
We think of a “Head First” reader as a learner.
So what does it take to learn something? First, you have to get it, then make sure 
you don’t forget it. It’s not about pushing facts into your head. Based on the latest 
research in cognitive science, neurobiology, and educational psychology, learning 
takes a lot more than text on a page. We know what turns your brain on.
Some of the Head First learning principles:
Make it visual. Images are far more memorable than words alone, and make learning much 
more effective (up to 89% improvement in recall and transfer studies). It also makes things more 
understandable.  Put the words within or near the graphics they relate to, rather than on 
the bottom or on another page, and learners will be up to twice as likely to solve problems related to the 
content.
Use a conversational and personalized style. In recent studies, students performed up 
to 40% better on post-learning tests if the content spoke directly to the reader, using a first-person, 
conversational style rather than taking a formal tone. Tell stories instead of lecturing. Use casual language. 
Don’t take yourself too seriously. Which would you pay more attention to: a stimulating dinner party 
companion or a lecture?
Get the learner to think more deeply. In other words, unless you actively flex your neurons, 
nothing much happens in your head.  A reader has to be motivated, engaged, curious, and inspired to 
solve problems, draw conclusions, and generate new knowledge. And for that, you need challenges, 
exercises, and thought-provoking questions, and activities that involve both sides of the brain and 
multiple senses.
Get—and keep—the reader’s attention. We’ve all had the “I really want to learn this but I can’t 
stay awake past page one” experience. Your brain pays attention to things that are out of the ordinary, 
interesting, strange, eye-catching, unexpected. Learning a new, tough, technical topic doesn’t have to be 
boring. Your brain will learn much more quickly if it’s not.
Touch their emotions. We now know that your ability to remember something is largely dependent 
on its emotional content.  You remember what you care about.  You remember when you feel something. 
No, we’re not talking heart-wrenching stories about a boy and his dog. We’re talking emotions like 
surprise, curiosity, fun, “what the…?” , and the feeling of “I Rule!” that comes when you solve a puzzle, 
learn something everybody else thinks is hard, or realize you know something that “I’m more technical 
than thou” Bob from engineering doesn’t.
you are here 4  xxvii
the intro
Metacognition: thinking about thinking
I wonder how 
I can trick my brain 
into remembering 
this stuff...
If you really want to learn, and you want to learn more quickly and more 
deeply, pay attention to how you pay attention. Think about how you think. 
Learn how you learn.
Most of us did not take courses on metacognition or learning theory when we 
were growing up. We were expected to learn, but rarely taught to learn.
But we assume that if you’re holding this book, you really want to learn how 
to design user-friendly websites. And you probably don’t want to spend a lot 
of time. If you want to use what you read in this book, you need to remember 
what you read. And for that, you’ve got to understand it. To get the most from 
this book, or any book or learning experience, take responsibility for your brain. 
Your brain on this content. 
The trick is to get your brain to see the new material you’re learning as 
Really Important. Crucial to your well-being. As important as a tiger. 
Otherwise, you’re in for a constant battle, with your brain doing its best to 
keep the new content from sticking.
So just how DO you get your brain to treat 
programming like it was a hungry tiger?
There’s the slow, tedious way, or the faster, more effective way. The 
slow way is about sheer repetition. You obviously know that you are able to learn 
and remember even the dullest of topics if you keep pounding the same thing into your 
brain. With enough repetition, your brain says, “This doesn’t feel important to him, but he 
keeps looking at the same thing over and over and over, so I suppose it must be.”
The faster way is to do anything that increases brain activity, especially different 
types of brain activity. The things on the previous page are a big part of the solution, 
and they’re all things that have been proven to help your brain work in your favor. For 
example, studies show that putting words within the pictures they describe (as opposed to 
somewhere else in the page, like a caption or in the body text) causes your brain to try to 
makes sense of how the words and picture relate, and this causes more neurons to fire. 
More neurons firing = more chances for your brain to get that this is something worth 
paying attention to, and possibly recording.
A conversational style helps because people tend to pay more attention when they 
perceive that they’re in a conversation, since they’re expected to follow along and hold up 
their end. The amazing thing is, your brain doesn’t necessarily care that the “conversation” 
is between you and a book! On the other hand, if the writing style is formal and dry, your 
brain perceives it the same way you experience being lectured to while sitting in a roomful 
of passive attendees. No need to stay awake.
But pictures and conversational style are just the beginning…
xxviii  intro
how to use this book
Here’s what WE did:
We used pictures, because your brain is tuned for visuals, not text. As far as your brain’s 
concerned, a picture really is worth a thousand words. And when text and pictures work 
together, we embedded the text in the pictures because your brain works more effectively 
when the text is within the thing the text refers to, as opposed to in a caption or buried in the 
text somewhere.
We used redundancy, saying the same thing in different ways and with different media types, 
and multiple senses, to increase the chance that the content gets coded into more than one area 
of your brain. 
We used concepts and pictures in unexpected ways because your brain is tuned for novelty, 
and we used pictures and ideas with at least some emotional content, because your brain 
is tuned to pay attention to the biochemistry of emotions. That which causes you to feel 
something is more likely to be remembered, even if that feeling is nothing more than a little 
humor, surprise, or interest.
We used a personalized, conversational style, because your brain is tuned to pay more 
attention when it believes you’re in a conversation than if it thinks you’re passively listening 
to a presentation. Your brain does this even when you’re reading.
We included more than 80 activities, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember 
more when you do things than when you read about things. And we made the exercises 
challenging-yet-do-able, because that’s what most people prefer.
We used multiple learning styles, because you might prefer step-by-step procedures, while 
someone else wants to understand the big picture first, and someone else just wants to see 
an example. But regardless of your own learning preference, everyone benefits from seeing the 
same content represented in multiple ways.
We include content for both sides of your brain, because the more of your brain you 
engage, the more likely you are to learn and remember, and the longer you can stay focused. 
Since working one side of the brain often means giving the other side a chance to rest, you 
can be more productive at learning for a longer period of time. 
And we included stories and exercises that present more than one point of view, 
because your brain is tuned to learn more deeply when it’s forced to make evaluations and 
judgments. 
We included challenges, with exercises, and by asking questions that don’t always have 
a straight answer, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember when it has to work at 
something. Think about it—you can’t get your body in shape just by watching people at the 
gym. But we did our best to make sure that when you’re working hard, it’s on the right things. 
That you’re not spending one extra dendrite processing a hard-to-understand example, 
or parsing difficult, jargon-laden, or overly terse text.
We used people. In stories, examples, pictures, etc., because, well, because you’re a person. 
And your brain pays more attention to people than it does to things. 
you are here 4  xxix
the intro
So, we did our part. The rest is up to you. These tips are a 
starting point; listen to your brain and figure out what works 
for you and what doesn’t. Try new things.
6
Drink water. Lots of it.
Your brain works best in a nice bath of fluid. 
Dehydration (which can happen before you ever 
feel thirsty) decreases cognitive function. 
9
Write a lot of code!
There’s only one way to learn to program: writing 
a lot of code. And that’s what you’re going to 
do throughout this book. Coding is a skill, and the 
only way to get good at it is to practice. We’re going 
to give you a lot of practice: every chapter has 
exercises that pose a problem for you to solve. Don’t 
just skip over them—a lot of the learning happens 
when you solve the exercises. We included a solution 
to each exercise—don’t be afraid to peek at the 
solution if you get stuck! (It’s easy to get snagged 
on something small.) But try to solve the problem 
before you look at the solution. And definitely get it 
working before you move on to the next part of the 
book.
8
Feel something.
Your brain needs to know that this matters. Get 
involved with the stories. Make up your own 
captions for the photos. Groaning over a bad joke 
is still better than feeling nothing at all.
7
Listen to your brain.
Pay attention to whether your brain is getting 
overloaded. If you find yourself starting to skim 
the surface or forget what you just read, it’s time 
for a break. Once you go past a certain point, you 
won’t learn faster by trying to shove more in, and 
you might even hurt the process.
5
Talk about it. Out loud.
Speaking activates a different part of the brain. If 
you’re trying to understand something, or increase 
your chance of remembering it later, say it out loud. 
Better still, try to explain it out loud to someone else. 
You’ll learn more quickly, and you might uncover 
ideas you hadn’t known were there when you were 
reading about it.
4
Make this the last thing you read before bed. 
Or at least the last challenging thing.
Part of the learning (especially the transfer to 
long-term memory) happens after you put the book 
down. Your brain needs time on its own, to do more 
processing. If you put in something new during that 
processing time, some of what you just learned will 
be lost. 
3
Read the “There are No Dumb Questions.”
That means all of them. They’re not optional 
sidebars, they’re part of the core content!
Don’t skip them.
Cut this out and stick it 
on your refrigerator.
Here’s what YOU can do to bend 
your brain into submission
2
Do the exercises. Write your own notes.
We put them in, but if we did them for you, that 
would be like having someone else do your workouts 
for you. And don’t just look at the exercises. Use a 
pencil. There’s plenty of evidence that physical 
activity while learning can increase the learning. 
Don’t just read. Stop and think. When the book asks 
you a question, don’t just skip to the answer. Imagine 
that someone really is asking the question. The 
more deeply you force your brain to think, the better 
chance you have of learning and remembering.
Slow down. The more you understand, the 
less you have to memorize.
1
xxx  intro
how to use this book
Read Me
This is a learning experience, not a reference book. We deliberately stripped out everything 
that might get in the way of learning whatever it is we’re working on at that point in the 
book. And the first time through, you need to begin at the beginning, because the book 
makes assumptions about what you’ve already seen and learned.
 
This book is designed to get you up to speed with Python as 
quickly as possible. 
As you need to know stuff, we teach it. So you won’t find long lists of technical material, no 
tables of Python’s operators, not its operator precedence rules. We don’t cover everything, 
but we’ve worked really hard to cover the essential material as well as we can, so that you 
can get Python into your brain quickly and have it stay there. The only assumption we make 
is that you already know how to program in some other programming language.
 
This book targets Python 3
We use Release 3 of the Python programming language in this book, and we cover how to 
get and install Python 3 in the first chapter. That said, we don’t completely ignore Release 
2, as you’ll discover in Chapters 8 through 11. But trust us, by then you’ll be so happy using 
Python, you won’t notice that the technologies you’re programming are running Python 2.
 
We put Python to work for you right away.
We get you doing useful stuff in Chapter 1 and build from there. There’s no hanging 
around, because we want you to be productive with Python right away.
 
The activities are NOT optional. 
The exercises and activities are not add-ons; they’re part of the core content of the book. 
Some of them are to help with memory, some are for understanding, and some will help 
you apply what you’ve learned. Don’t skip the exercises.
 
The redundancy is intentional and important. 
One distinct difference in a Head First book is that we want you to really get it. And we 
want you to finish the book remembering what you’ve learned. Most reference books don’t 
have retention and recall as a goal, but this book is about learning, so you’ll see some of the 
same concepts come up more than once. 
you are here 4  xxxi
the intro
The examples are as lean as possible.
Our readers tell us that it’s frustrating to wade through 200 lines of an example looking 
for the two lines they need to understand. Most examples in this book are shown within 
the smallest possible context, so that the part you’re trying to learn is clear and simple. 
Don’t expect all of the examples to be robust, or even complete—they are written 
specifically for learning, and aren’t always fully functional. 
We’ve placed a lot of the code examples on the Web so you can copy and paste them as 
needed. You’ll find them at two locations:
 
 
http://www.headfirstlabs.com/books/hfpython/ 
 
http://python.itcarlow.ie
The Brain Power exercises don’t have answers.
For some of them, there is no right answer, and for others, part of the learning 
experience of the Brain Power activities is for you to decide if and when your answers 
are right. In some of the Brain Power exercises, you will find hints to point you in the 
right direction.
xxxii  intro
the review team
the review team
David Griffiths is the author of Head First Rails 
and the coauthor of Head First Programming. He began 
programming at age 12, when he saw a documentary 
on the work of Seymour Papert. At age 15, he wrote 
an implementation of Papert’s computer language 
LOGO. After studying Pure Mathematics at University, 
he began writing code for computers and magazine 
articles for humans. He’s worked as an agile coach, 
a developer, and a garage attendant, but not in that 
order. He can write code in over 10 languages and 
prose in just one, and when not writing, coding, or 
coaching, he spends much of his spare time traveling 
with his lovely wife—and fellow Head First author—
Dawn. 
Phil Hartley has a degree in Computer Science 
from Edinburgh, Scotland. Having spent more than 
30 years in the IT industry with specific expertise in 
OOP, he is now teaching full time at the University 
of Advancing Technology in Tempe, AZ. In his spare 
time, Phil is a raving NFL fanatic
Jeremy Jones is coauthor of Python for Unix and 
Linux System Administration. He has been actively using 
Python since 2001. He has been a developer, system 
administrator, quality assurance engineer, and tech 
support analyst. They all have their rewards and 
challenges, but his most challenging and rewarding job 
has been husband and father.
Technical Reviewers:
Jeremy Jones
Phil Hartley
David Griffiths
The technical review team
you are here 4  xxxiii
the intro
My editor:
Brian Sawyer was Head First Python’s editor. When not editing 
books, Brian likes to run marathons in his spare time. This turns out 
to be the perfect training for working on another book with me (our 
second together). O’Reilly and Head First are lucky to have someone 
of Brian’s caliber working to make this and other books the best they 
can be.
Acknowledgments
Brian Sawyer
The O’Reilly team:
Karen Shaner provided administrative support and very capably coordinated the techical review process, responding 
quickly to my many queries and requests for help. There’s also the back-room gang to thank—the O’Reilly Production 
Team—who guided this book through its final stages and turned my InDesign files into the beautiful thing you’re 
holding in your hands right now (or maybe you’re on an iPad, Android tablet, or reading on your PC—that’s cool, too).
And thanks to the other Head First authors who, via Twitter, offered cheers, suggestions, and encouragement 
throughout the entire writing process. You might not think 140 characters make a big difference, but they really do.
I am also grateful to Bert Bates who, together with Kathy Sierra, created this series of books with their wonderful 
Head First Java. At the start of this book, Bert took the time to set the tone with a marathon 90-minute phone call, 
which stretched my thinking on what I wanted to do to the limit and pushed me to write a better book. Now, some nine 
months after the phone call, I’m pretty sure I’ve recovered from the mind-bending Bert put me through.
Friends and colleagues:
My thanks again to Nigel Whyte, Head of Department, Computing and Networking at The Institute of Technology, 
Carlow, for supporting my involvement in yet another book (especially so soon after the last one). 
My students (those enrolled on 3rd Year Games Development and 4th Year Software Engineering) have been exposed 
to this material in various forms over the last 18 months. Their positive reaction to Python and the approach I take with 
my classes helped inform the structure and eventual content of this book. (And yes, folks, some of this is on your final).
Family:
My family, Deirdre, Joseph, Aaron, and Aideen had to, once more, bear the grunts and groans, huffs and puffs, 
and more than a few roars on more than one occasion (although, to be honest, not as often they did with Head First 
Programming). After the last book, I promised I wouldn’t start another one “for a while.” It turned out “a while” was no 
more than a few weeks, and I’ll be forever grateful that they didn’t gang up and throw me out of the house for breaking 
my promise. Without their support, and especially the ongoing love and support of my wife, Deirdre, this book would 
not have seen the light of day.
The without-whom list:
My technical review team did an excellent job of keeping me straight and making sure what I covered was spot on. 
They confirmed when my material was working, challenged me when it wasn’t and not only pointed out when stuff 
was wrong, but provided suggestions on how to fix it. This is especially true of David Griffiths, my co-conspirator on 
Head First Programming, whose technical review comments went above and beyond the call of duty. David’s name might 
not be on the cover of this book, but a lot of his ideas and suggestions grace its pages, and I was thrilled and will forever 
remain grateful that he approached his role as tech reviewer on Head First Python with such gusto.
xxxiv  intro
safari books online
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that lets 
you easily search over 7,500 technology and creative reference 
books and videos to find the answers you need quickly.
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our library 
online. Read books on your cell phone and mobile devices. Access new titles before 
they are available for print, and get exclusive access to manuscripts in development 
and post feedback for the authors. Copy and paste code samples, organize your 
favorites, download chapters, bookmark key sections, create notes, print out pages, 
and benefit from tons of other time-saving features.
O’Reilly Media has uploaded this book to the Safari Books Online service. To have 
full digital access to this book and others on similar topics from O’Reilly and other 
publishers, sign up for free at http://my.safaribooksonline.com/?portal=oreilly.
this is a new chapter  1
Yes, yes...we have lots 
of Pythons in stock... I’ll 
just make a quick list.
meet python
1
Everyone loves lists
You’re asking one question: “What makes Python different?”
The short answer is: lots of things. The longer answers starts by stating that there’s lots 
that’s familiar, too. Python is a lot like any other general-purpose programming language, 
with statements, expressions, operators, functions, modules, methods, and classes. 
All the usual stuff, really. And then there’s the other stuff Python provides that makes 
the programmer’s life—your life—that little bit easier. You’ll start your tour of Python by 
learning about lists. But, before getting to that, there’s another important question that 
needs answering…
2  Chapter 1
python greatness
What’s to like about Python?
Lots. Rather than tell you, this book’s goal is to show you the greatness that is 
Python. 
Yeah... I need something that I can deploy 
on PCs, Macs, handhelds, phones,the Web, 
on big servers and small clients...and it has 
to let me build GUIs quickly and painlessly...
OK, yes, yeah, I’m listening... What?!? 
You’re kidding! Python can do all that?
Before diving head first into Python, let’s get a bit of  housekeeping out of 
the way. 
To work with and execute the Python code in this book, you need a copy of 
the Python 3 interpreter on your computer. Like a lot of things to do with 
Python, it’s not difficult to install the interpreter. Assuming, of course, it’s not 
already there…
you are here 4  3
meet python
Install Python 3
Before you write and run Python code, you need to make sure the Python 
interpreter is on your computer. In this book, you’ll start out with Release 3 of 
Python, the very latest (and best) version of the language.
A release of Python might already be on your computer. Mac OS X comes 
with Python 2 preinstalled, as do most versions of Linux (which can also ship 
with Release 3). Windows, in contrast, doesn’t include any release of Python. 
Let’s check your computer for Python 3. Open up a command-line prompt 
and, if you are using Mac OS X or Linux, type:
 
 
 
python3 -V
On Windows, use this command:
 
c:\Python31\python.exe -V
That’s an UPPERCASE 
“v”, by the way.
$ python3 -V
Python 3.1.2
$ 
$ python3
Python 3.1.2 (r312:79360M, Mar 24 2010, 01:33:18) 
[GCC 4.0.1 (Apple Inc. build 5493)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more info.
>>> 
>>> quit()
$ 
File  Edit   Window  Help   WhichPython?
Using the 
UPPERCASE “v” 
results in the Python 
version appearing on 
screen.
Without the 
UPPERCASE “v”, 
you are taken 
into the Python 
interpreter.
Use the quit() 
command to exit 
the interpreter and 
return to your OS 
prompt.
If Python 3 is missing from 
your computer, download 
a copy for your favorite OS 
from the www.python.org 
website.
Do this!
Let’s take a quick look at IDLE.
When you install Python 3, you also get IDLE, Python’s simple—yet 
surprisingly useful— integrated development environment. IDLE includes a 
color syntax-highlighting editor, a debugger, the Python Shell, and a complete 
copy of Python 3’s online documentation set.
4  Chapter 1
idle hands
Use IDLE to help learn Python
IDLE lets you write code in its full-featured code editor as well as experiment 
with code at the Python Shell. You’ll use the code editor later in this book 
but, when learning Python, IDLE’s shell really rocks, because it lets you try 
out new Python code as you go.
When you first start IDLE, you are presented with the “triple chevron” 
prompt (>>>) at which you enter code. The shell takes your code statement 
and immediately executes it for you, displaying any results produced on screen.
IDLE knows all about Python syntax and offers “completion hints” that pop 
up when you use a built-in function like print(). Python programmers 
generally refer to built-in functions as BIFs. The print() BIF displays 
messages to standard output (usually the screen). 
IDLE uses colored syntax to highlight your code. By default, built-in 
functions are purple, strings are green, and language keywords (like if) are 
orange. Any results produced are in blue. If you hate these color choices, 
don’t worry; you can easily change them by adjusting IDLE’s preferences.
IDLE also knows all about Python’s indentation syntax, which requires code 
blocks be indented. When you start with Python, this can be hard to get 
used to, but IDLE keeps you straight by automatically indenting as needed.
IDLE knows 
Python’s syntax 
and helps you 
conform to 
the Python 
indentation rules.
Enter your code 
at the >>> prompt.
See results 
immediately.
Unlike other C-based 
languages, which use { and } 
to delimit blocks, Python uses 
indentation instead. 
you are here 4  5
meet python
Work effectively with IDLE
IDLE has lots of features, but you need to know about only 
a few of them to get going. 
TAB completion
Start to type in some code, and then press the TAB key. 
IDLE will offer suggestions to help you complete your 
statement.
Type “pr” and then 
TAB at the >>> prompt 
to see IDLE’s list of 
command completion 
suggestions.
Recall code statements
Press Alt-P to recall the previous code statement entered into 
IDLE or press Alt-N to move to the next code statement 
(assuming there is one). Both key combinations can be used 
to cycle rapidly through all of the code you’ve entered into 
IDLE, re-executing any code statements as needed.
Edit recalled code
Once you recall your code statement, you can edit it and 
move around the statement using the arrow keys. It’s 
possible to edit any statement that you’ve previously 
entered, even code statements that span multiple lines. 
Adjust IDLE’s preferences
IDLE’s preferences dialog lets you adjust its default 
behavior to your tastes. There are four tabs of settings to 
tweak. You can control font and tab behavior, the colors 
used to syntax highlight, the behavior of certain key-
combinations, and IDLE’s start-up settings. So, if shocking 
pink strings is really your thing, IDLE gives you the power 
to change how your code looks on screen.
Alt-P for Previous
Alt-N for Next
Tweak IDLE 
to your heart’s 
content.
This is how IDLE looks on 
my computer. It might look a 
little different on yours, but 
not by much. (And, yes, it’s 
meant to look this ugly.)
Unless you’re on 
a Mac, in which 
case it’s Ctrl-P 
and Ctrl-N.
6  Chapter 1
dealing with data
Deal with complex data
Any program of any worth that you create has to work with data. Sometimes, 
the data is simple and straightforward—easy to work with. Other times, the 
data you have to work with is complex in its structure and meaning, forcing you 
to work hard to make sense of it all, let alone write code to process it.
To tame complexity, you can often arrange your data as a list: there’s the list 
of customers, your friend’s list, the shopping list, and your to-do list (to name 
a few). Arranging data in lists is so common that Python makes it easy for you 
to create and process lists in code.
Let’s look at some complex data before learning how to create and process list 
data with Python.
The Holy Grail, 1975, Terry Jones & Terry Gilliam, 91 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Life of Brian, 1979, Terry Jones, 94 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Meaning of Life, 1983, Terry Jones, 107 mins
 
The six Monty Python cast members
The Holy Grail, 1975, Terry Jones & Terry Gilliam, 91 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Life of Brian, 1979, Terry Jones, 94 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Meaning of Life, 1983, Terry Jones, 107 mins
 
The six Monty Python cast members
The Holy Grail, 1975, Terry Jones & Terry Gilliam, 91 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Life of Brian, 1979, Terry Jones, 94 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Meaning of Life, 1983, Terry Jones, 107 mins
 
The six Monty Python cast members
I’ve been making lists of 
movie data for years and 
would love to be able to 
process it on my laptop...
The Holy Grail, 1975, Terry Jones & Terry Gilliam, 91 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Life of Brian, 1979, Terry Jones, 94 mins
 
Graham Chapman
 
 
Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
The Meaning of Life, 1983, Terry Jones, 107 mins
 
The six Monty Python cast members
 
 
Graham Chapman, Michael Palin, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle & Terry Jones
There sure is 
a lot of data 
listed here.
This data is complex, too.
A highly 
organized 
movie buff
On first glance, this collection of data does indeed look quite complex. 
However, the data appears to conform to some sort of structure: there’s a line 
for a list of basic movie facts, then another line for the lead actor(s), followed 
by a third line listing the movie’s supporting actors. 
This looks like a structure you can work with…
you are here 4  7
meet python
Create simple Python lists
Let’s start with the following simple list of movie titles and work up from 
there:
The Holy Grail
The Life of Brian
The Meaning of Life
A short list of some 
Monty Python movies
Here’s the same list written in a way that Python understands:
  movies = ["The Holy Grail",
 
 
"The Life of Brian",
 
 
"The Meaning of Life"]
To turn the human-friendly list into a Python-friendly one, follow this four-
step process:
It’s perfectly OK to put your list creation code all on one line, assuming, of 
course, that you have room:
  movies = ["The Holy Grail", "The Life of Brian", "The Meaning of Life"]
This works, too.
Convert each of the names into strings by surrounding the data with quotes.
1
Separate each of the list items from the next with a comma.
2
Surround the list of items with opening and closing square brackets.
3
Assign the list to an identifier (movies in the preceding code) using the 
assignment operator (=).
4
8  Chapter 1
not my type
Hang on a second! Aren’t you 
forgetting something? Don’t you need to 
declare type information for your list?
No, because Python’s variable identifiers 
don’t have a type.
Many other programming languages insist that every 
identifier used in code has type information declared for 
it. Not so with Python: identifiers are simply names that 
refer to a data object of  some type. 
Think of Python’s list as a high-level collection. The 
type of the data items is not important to the list. It’s 
OK to state that your movies list is a “collection of 
strings,” but Python doesn’t need to be told this. All 
Python needs to know is that you need a list, you’ve 
given it a name, and the list has some data items in it.
you are here 4  9
meet python
  The Life of Brian
Lists are like arrays
When you create a list in Python, the interpreter creates an array-like data 
structure in memory to hold your data, with your data items stacked from 
the bottom up. Like array technology in other programming languages, the 
first slot in the stack is numbered 0, the second is numbered 1, the third is 
numbered 2, and so on: 
This is your “movies” 
list in memory.
This is your 
“movies” list in 
code.
Each data item 
in the list has a 
numeric OFFSET 
associated with it.
Python starts counting 
from zero.
Access list data using the square bracket notation
As with arrays, you can access the data item in a list slot using the standard 
square bracket offset notation:
 print(movies[1])
  movies = ["The Holy Grail", "The Life of Brian", "The Meaning of Life"]
"The Holy Grail"
"The Life of Brian"
"The Meaning of Life"
 2
1
  0
Item #0
Item #1
Item #2
Use the “print()” BIF to display a 
data item on screen.
No surprise here, really…the 
requested data appears on screen.
Let’s use IDLE to learn a bit about how lists work.
